README.md, before:

# Lispy - A LISP (clojure-ish) Interpreter Written in Python
There are many reasons why you would want to write an interpreter, even more so if you
enjoyed your courses in compilers and programming languages semantics, like I did.
Why LISP? Because its syntax is very simple, so you don't have to waste time in
coding boring parts such as lexing and parsing, and you can jump straight in the fun
parts: interpreting! Also, macros.

## Example
```
(def readme
    (let (lines ((. readlines (open "README.md"))))
        (map (# (. strip %0)) lines)))

(def headers
    (filter (# and %0 (= (first %0) "#")) readme))

(def header_titles
    (map (# let (words ((. split %0) " "))
            (+ "\t- " ((. join " ") (rest words))))
        headers))

(print "Sections of the readme:\n" ((. join "\n") header_titles))

(comment - almost forgot...)
(pyimport this antigravity)
```


## Main Features

### Python interoperability
Thanks to `pyimport` and `pyimport_from`, it is possible to import python
objects and use them:

```
>>> (pyimport_from sklearn.svm SVC)
... (pyimport_from sklearn.datasets load_iris)
... (pyimport_from sklearn.model_selection train_test_split)
...
... (let (iris (load_iris)
...     (X_train X_test y_train y_test) (train_test_split (. data iris) (. target iris))
...         clf (SVC))
...     (do
...         ((. fit clf) X_train y_train)
...         (print "Accuracy on test set: " ((. score clf) X_test y_test))))
...
Accuracy on test set:  0.947368421053
None
```

### Macros
A word of caution: I studied macros while implementing them here, so...
Anyway, these are two simple macros that are included in the standard
library:

```
>>> (defmacro when (cond & body)
...     (list 'if cond (cons 'do body) None))
<macro "when">
>>> (macroexpand when (= 1 1) (print "Hello") (print "World!"))
(if (= 1 1) (do (print Hello) (print World!)) None)
>>> (when (= 1 1) (print "Hello") (print "World!"))
Hello
World!
None
>>> (defmacro unless (cond body)
...     (list 'if (list 'not cond) body None))
<macro "unless">
>>> (macroexpand unless (!= 1 1) (print "Nope!"))
(if (not (!= 1 1)) (print Nope!) None)
>>> (unless (!= 1 1) (print "Nope!"))
Nope!
None
```


### Stack Traces
When exceptions happen, the stacktrace of the interpreted code is printed,
together with a python stacktrace of the interpreter (not shown here):

```
>>> (defn stupid_divide (x)
...     (if (= x 0)
...         (/ 100 x)
...         (let (y (stupid_divide (dec x)))
...             (/ x y))))
... (stupid_divide 3)
Call Stack (most recent last):
  (stupid_divide 3)
  (stupid_divide x=3)
  (if (= x 0) (/ 100 x) (let (...) (...)))
  (let (y (...)) (/ x y))
  (stupid_divide (dec x))
  (stupid_divide x=2)
  (if (= x 0) (/ 100 x) (let (...) (...)))
  (let (y (...)) (/ x y))
  (stupid_divide (dec x))
  (stupid_divide x=1)
  (if (= x 0) (/ 100 x) (let (...) (...)))
  (let (y (...)) (/ x y))
  (stupid_divide (dec x))
  (stupid_divide x=0)
  (if (= x 0) (/ 100 x) (let (...) (...)))
Exception happened here: (/ 100 x)
```

### REPL
Based on [python-prompt-toolkit](https://github.com/jonathanslenders/python-prompt-toolkit);
it still needs some love, but has the basics. Use `ctrl+enter` to evaluate an
input, as `enter` inserts a new line:

```
$ python repl.py
>>> (+ 1 1)
2
```


### Standard library
It's still tiny, but it's there (`lispy/stdlib.lispy`)! I tried to implement as few
utilities as possible with python (`lispy/globals.py`), and leave the rest as
testing playground for the interpreter. Beware: I tried to write it in functional
style, but I'm not a good functional programmer, and I focused on "clarity"
(hopefully) rather than efficiency, so... Yea :)


## Structure
The juicy part is in `interpreter.py`. There are two implementations: a recursive
version and an iterative version. The recursive version is quite natural to
write and understand, given the recursive structure of LISP code; on the other hand,
it takes very little to kill the interpreter with a `StackOverflowException` (around 
70/80 recursive calls). For this reason, it is not maintained anymore, but preserved
as an illustrative example.

To "solve" the recursion limit issue, there is an iterative interpreter, which
basically maintains a stack of coroutines and moves parameters and return values
around (it's recursion disguised!). It's pretty fun, if you ask me: when you are
evaluating an expression, and need to evaluate  a sub-expression (e.g. when
evaluating an `if`, you need to evaluate the condition), simply `yield` it, and
you will magically receive its value back; the last thing you should `yield` is the
final value of the expression, or an expression to evaluate in its place.
For example, this is how `(if cond iftrue iffalse)` is evaluated:


```
def handle_if(self, ctx, expr, cond, iftrue, iffalse):
    cval = yield CodeResult(cond, ctx)
    if cval:
        yield CodeResult(iftrue, ctx)
    else:
        yield CodeResult(iffalse, ctx)
```

Note that `cond`, `iftrue` and `iffalse` are raw expressions, while `cval` is the
evaluated value of `cond` (e.g. if `cond` is `(= 1 0)` then `cval` will be python's
`False`). Finally, `CodeResult` tells the interpreter to evaluate either `iftrue` of
`iffalse` to get the value of the condition. On the other hand, `ValueResult` indicates
that the result is already a value and does not need to be evaluated; this distinction
is needed because lispy is [homoiconic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homoiconicity),
which basically means that code and data have the same representation, thus you may
not be able to know whether an expression is actual _code_ or just a _value_ resulting
from the evaluation of another expression (most notably, macros and quoted stuff).

In case you are wondering, `ctx` is a variable that holds the execution context in
which the expression is evaluated; in other words, it is a kind of dictionary that
contains the variables visible at that point. Contexts can have a parent context,
and may "override" the values of its variables, so that only the youngest version is
visible. The root context contains language builtins that can be accessed and
redefined from everywhere; currently, the builtins are implemented in python and
contained in `globals.py`.

Functions are implemented as a class that is initialized with the body of the
function and the formal parameters, and, when called, creates a new context with
the actual parameters and evaluates the body. Basically, any python callable can
be used as a function from the LISP code! This made integrating python into Lispy
straightforward, and relieves me from the burden of implementing lists and
dicts myself (which would entail nuking the tokenization/parsing modules), as well
as anything else that is found in the python ecosystem!

## Syntax
This is a preview of what is currently supported, and how to do it. Check the
global builtins and the standard library to see the full capabilities.

#### Conditionals
`(if <condition> <iftrue> <iffalse>)`

If condition evaluates to true then iftrue is evaluated and returned, otherwise
iffalse is evaluated and returned.

#### Function Definition

`(defn <name> (arg-1 ... arg-n [& vararg]) <body>)`

Introduces a new function. The last argument can be a vararg.

#### Anonymous Function Definition
`(# <expr-1> ... <expr-n>)`

Introduces a new function with no name (unless you give it one!), which thus can
only be called; arguments can be accessed via `%i`, where `i` is the i-th
argument (e.g. `%1` is the *second* argument). It is equivalent to
`(defn _ (%0 ... %m) (<expr-1> ... <expr-n>))`, note the parentheses surrounding
the wrapped expressions.

#### Function/Macro Invokation
`(<function> <arg-1> ... <arg-n> [& <vararg>])`

Evaluates to the value returned by the function/macro called with the given parameters.
The last argument can be a vararg. `<function>` can be a name or an expression
that evaluates to a function (e.g. an anonymous function).

Supports unpacking of parameters: `(defn f (a (b c)) (+ a b c)) (f 1 (list 2 3))`
results in `6`.

#### Let Expression
`(let (name-1 <expr-1> ... name-n <expr-n>) <expr>)`

Introduces new definitions in the context and evaluates `expr`, whose value is
the value of the whole let expression. The definitions are discarded afterwards
(i.e. outside this block).

Supports unpacking of variables: `(let (a 1 (b c) (list 2 3)) (+ a b c))` results in `6`.

#### Name Definition
`(def name-1 <expr-1> ... name-n <expr-n>)`

Introduces new definitions in the context. The value of the expression is the
value of `expr-n`.

#### Do blocks
`(do expr-1 ... expr-n)`

Evaluates all expressions in order, and returns the value of the last one. If an
expression has side effects, they will be visible afterwards (e.g. functions
defined in a do will be visible outside it).

#### In collection
`(in item collection)`

Returns true if the collection contains the given item.

#### Python Imports
 - `(pyimport mod-1 ... mod-n)`

   Imports the given python modules.

 - `(pyimport_from mod name)`

   Equivalent to `from mod import name`, note that `mod` can contain dots.

#### Property Invokation
`(. object property)`

Returns the property of the given object.

#### Comments
`(comment <text>)`

Ignores the content.

#### Macro Definition
`(defmacro <name> (arg-1 ... arg-n [& vararg]) <body>)`

Introduces a new macro.

#### Quoting and Unquoting
`(quote <expr-1> ... <expr-n>)` or shortcut `(' <expr-1> ... <expr-n>)`, use 
`'<token>` to quote a single token.

Quotes the given token/expressions, meaning that they will not evaluated but returned
"as is". The symbol `~` can be used to un-quote the expression following it (careful,
`~name` is a single token, thus it will not be un-quoted, use a space for it: `~ name`).

For example:

```
>>> (let (x 2) (' 1 x (inc x) 4))
(1 x (inc x) 4)
>>> (let (x 2) (' 1 ~ x ~(inc x) 4))
(1 2 3 4)
>>> (let (x 2) (' 1 ~ x ~(inc 'x) 4))
Call Stack (most recent last):
  (let (x 2) (' 1 ~ x ~ (...) 4))
  (' 1 ~ x ~ (inc 'x) 4)
  (inc 'x)
  (inc x=x)
Exception happened here: (+ x 1)
...
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +=: 'Token' and 'int'
```

#### Consider as a Variable Name
`($ x)`

Considers `x` as a variable name, and evaluate it, e.g. `(let (x 3) ($ "x"))` evaluates to `3`. A
slightly more complicated example is the pair `(list '+ ($ "x") 4))` and `(list '+ ($ "x") 1))`,
which get evaluated to the same result: `(+ 1 4)` (supposing `x` has value 1).
Useful when writing macros, because it causes `x` to be interpreted as a variable after the macro is
expanded, instead of a string. Consider the `letfn` macro in the standard library:

```
(defmacro letfn (function expression)
    (let (fname (first function)
          fparams (second function)
          fbody (last function)
          anon (map (# list '$ (+ "%" (str %0))) (range (len fparams))))

        (list 'let (list fname (list '# 'let (concat & (zip fparams anon)) fbody))
            expression)))
```

which is supposed to be used like this: `(letfn (add (x y z) (+ x y z)) (add 1 2 3))`,
producing `6` as result; the macro is expanded as
`(let (add (# let (x ($ %0) y ($ %1) z ($ %2)) (+ x y z))) (add 1 2 3))`. The `$` tells
the interpreter that `%0`, `%1` and `%2` should be interpreted as tokens, and hence take
the value of `1`, `2` and `3` respectively; without it, they would be interpreted as strings,
and the result of the expression would be `%0%1%2`.


#### Pattern Matching
`(match <expr> (<pattern-1> <result-1>) ... (<pattern-n> <result-n>))`

Executes the result corresponding to the first pattern that "matches"
`<expr>`, similarly to the unpacking of variables done in `let` expressions.
Raises an error if the variable does not match any pattern.
For example:

```
(match var 
    ((a) "list with one elemet")
    ((a b c) "list with three elements")
    (x "list with a different number of elements or not a list")))
```

Commit message:

pip installation and cli command

README.md, after:

# Lispy - A LISP (clojure-ish) Interpreter Written in Python
There are many reasons why you would want to write an interpreter, even more so if you
enjoyed your courses in compilers and programming languages semantics, like I did.
Why LISP? Because its syntax is very simple, so you don't have to waste time in
coding boring parts such as lexing and parsing, and you can jump straight in the fun
parts: interpreting! Also, macros.

## Example
```
(def readme
    (let (lines ((. readlines (open "README.md"))))
        (map (# (. strip %0)) lines)))

(def headers
    (filter (# and %0 (= (first %0) "#")) readme))

(def header_titles
    (map (# let (words ((. split %0) " "))
            (+ "\t- " ((. join " ") (rest words))))
        headers))

(print "Sections of the readme:\n" ((. join "\n") header_titles))

(comment - almost forgot...)
(pyimport this antigravity)
```


## Main Features

### Python interoperability
Thanks to `pyimport` and `pyimport_from`, it is possible to import python
objects and use them:

```
>>> (pyimport_from sklearn.svm SVC)
... (pyimport_from sklearn.datasets load_iris)
... (pyimport_from sklearn.model_selection train_test_split)
...
... (let (iris (load_iris)
...     (X_train X_test y_train y_test) (train_test_split (. data iris) (. target iris))
...         clf (SVC))
...     (do
...         ((. fit clf) X_train y_train)
...         (print "Accuracy on test set: " ((. score clf) X_test y_test))))
...
Accuracy on test set:  0.947368421053
None
```

### Macros
A word of caution: I studied macros while implementing them here, so...
Anyway, these are two simple macros that are included in the standard
library:

```
>>> (defmacro when (cond & body)
...     (list 'if cond (cons 'do body) None))
<macro "when">
>>> (macroexpand when (= 1 1) (print "Hello") (print "World!"))
(if (= 1 1) (do (print Hello) (print World!)) None)
>>> (when (= 1 1) (print "Hello") (print "World!"))
Hello
World!
None
>>> (defmacro unless (cond body)
...     (list 'if (list 'not cond) body None))
<macro "unless">
>>> (macroexpand unless (!= 1 1) (print "Nope!"))
(if (not (!= 1 1)) (print Nope!) None)
>>> (unless (!= 1 1) (print "Nope!"))
Nope!
None
```


### Stack Traces
When exceptions happen, the stacktrace of the interpreted code is printed,
together with a python stacktrace of the interpreter (not shown here):

```
>>> (defn stupid_divide (x)
...     (if (= x 0)
...         (/ 100 x)
...         (let (y (stupid_divide (dec x)))
...             (/ x y))))
... (stupid_divide 3)
Call Stack (most recent last):
  (stupid_divide 3)
  (stupid_divide x=3)
  (if (= x 0) (/ 100 x) (let (...) (...)))
  (let (y (...)) (/ x y))
  (stupid_divide (dec x))
  (stupid_divide x=2)
  (if (= x 0) (/ 100 x) (let (...) (...)))
  (let (y (...)) (/ x y))
  (stupid_divide (dec x))
  (stupid_divide x=1)
  (if (= x 0) (/ 100 x) (let (...) (...)))
  (let (y (...)) (/ x y))
  (stupid_divide (dec x))
  (stupid_divide x=0)
  (if (= x 0) (/ 100 x) (let (...) (...)))
Exception happened here: (/ 100 x)
```

### REPL
Based on [python-prompt-toolkit](https://github.com/jonathanslenders/python-prompt-toolkit);
it still needs some love, but has the basics. Use `alt+enter` to evaluate an
input, as `enter` inserts a new line:

```
$ python lispy/cli.py
>>> (+ 1 1)
2
```

### Installation and usage

Installable via pip:

```
pip install git+https://github.com/e-dorigatti/lispy
```

Then can be invoked via the CLI:

```
$ lispy --help
Usage: cli.py [OPTIONS] [INPUT_FILE]...

  Python-based LISP interpreter.

  Starts a REPL if launched without arguments, executes the code in the
  given file, or evaluates the given expression.

Options:
  -e, --expression TEXT  Evaluate this expression and print the result
  -S, --without-stdlib   Do not load standard library at startup.
  --help                 Show this message and exit.
```

### Standard library
It's still tiny, but it's there (`lispy/stdlib.lispy`)! I tried to implement as few
utilities as possible with python (`lispy/globals.py`), and leave the rest as
testing playground for the interpreter. Beware: I tried to write it in functional
style, but I'm not a good functional programmer, and I focused on "clarity"
(hopefully) rather than efficiency, so... Yea :)


## Structure
The juicy part is in `interpreter.py`. There are two implementations: a recursive
version and an iterative version. The recursive version is quite natural to
write and understand, given the recursive structure of LISP code; on the other hand,
it takes very little to kill the interpreter with a `StackOverflowException` (around 
70/80 recursive calls). For this reason, it is not maintained anymore, but preserved
as an illustrative example.

To "solve" the recursion limit issue, there is an iterative interpreter, which
basically maintains a stack of coroutines and moves parameters and return values
around (it's recursion disguised!). It's pretty fun, if you ask me: when you are
evaluating an expression, and need to evaluate  a sub-expression (e.g. when
evaluating an `if`, you need to evaluate the condition), simply `yield` it, and
you will magically receive its value back; the last thing you should `yield` is the
final value of the expression, or an expression to evaluate in its place.
For example, this is how `(if cond iftrue iffalse)` is evaluated:


```
def handle_if(self, ctx, expr, cond, iftrue, iffalse):
    cval = yield CodeResult(cond, ctx)
    if cval:
        yield CodeResult(iftrue, ctx)
    else:
        yield CodeResult(iffalse, ctx)
```

Note that `cond`, `iftrue` and `iffalse` are raw expressions, while `cval` is the
evaluated value of `cond` (e.g. if `cond` is `(= 1 0)` then `cval` will be python's
`False`). Finally, `CodeResult` tells the interpreter to evaluate either `iftrue` of
`iffalse` to get the value of the condition. On the other hand, `ValueResult` indicates
that the result is already a value and does not need to be evaluated; this distinction
is needed because lispy is [homoiconic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homoiconicity),
which basically means that code and data have the same representation, thus you may
not be able to know whether an expression is actual _code_ or just a _value_ resulting
from the evaluation of another expression (most notably, macros and quoted stuff).

In case you are wondering, `ctx` is a variable that holds the execution context in
which the expression is evaluated; in other words, it is a kind of dictionary that
contains the variables visible at that point. Contexts can have a parent context,
and may "override" the values of its variables, so that only the youngest version is
visible. The root context contains language builtins that can be accessed and
redefined from everywhere; currently, the builtins are implemented in python and
contained in `globals.py`.

Functions are implemented as a class that is initialized with the body of the
function and the formal parameters, and, when called, creates a new context with
the actual parameters and evaluates the body. Basically, any python callable can
be used as a function from the LISP code! This made integrating python into Lispy
straightforward, and relieves me from the burden of implementing lists and
dicts myself (which would entail nuking the tokenization/parsing modules), as well
as anything else that is found in the python ecosystem!

## Syntax
This is a preview of what is currently supported, and how to do it. Check the
global builtins and the standard library to see the full capabilities.

#### Conditionals
`(if <condition> <iftrue> <iffalse>)`

If condition evaluates to true then iftrue is evaluated and returned, otherwise
iffalse is evaluated and returned.

#### Function Definition

`(defn <name> (arg-1 ... arg-n [& vararg]) <body>)`

Introduces a new function. The last argument can be a vararg.

#### Anonymous Function Definition
`(# <expr-1> ... <expr-n>)`

Introduces a new function with no name (unless you give it one!), which thus can
only be called; arguments can be accessed via `%i`, where `i` is the i-th
argument (e.g. `%1` is the *second* argument). It is equivalent to
`(defn _ (%0 ... %m) (<expr-1> ... <expr-n>))`, note the parentheses surrounding
the wrapped expressions.

#### Function/Macro Invokation
`(<function> <arg-1> ... <arg-n> [& <vararg>])`

Evaluates to the value returned by the function/macro called with the given parameters.
The last argument can be a vararg. `<function>` can be a name or an expression
that evaluates to a function (e.g. an anonymous function).

Supports unpacking of parameters: `(defn f (a (b c)) (+ a b c)) (f 1 (list 2 3))`
results in `6`.

#### Let Expression
`(let (name-1 <expr-1> ... name-n <expr-n>) <expr>)`

Introduces new definitions in the context and evaluates `expr`, whose value is
the value of the whole let expression. The definitions are discarded afterwards
(i.e. outside this block).

Supports unpacking of variables: `(let (a 1 (b c) (list 2 3)) (+ a b c))` results in `6`.

#### Name Definition
`(def name-1 <expr-1> ... name-n <expr-n>)`

Introduces new definitions in the context. The value of the expression is the
value of `expr-n`.

#### Do blocks
`(do expr-1 ... expr-n)`

Evaluates all expressions in order, and returns the value of the last one. If an
expression has side effects, they will be visible afterwards (e.g. functions
defined in a do will be visible outside it).

#### In collection
`(in item collection)`

Returns true if the collection contains the given item.

#### Python Imports
 - `(pyimport mod-1 ... mod-n)`

   Imports the given python modules.

 - `(pyimport_from mod name)`

   Equivalent to `from mod import name`, note that `mod` can contain dots.

#### Property Invokation
`(. object property)`

Returns the property of the given object.

#### Comments
`(comment <text>)`

Ignores the content.

#### Macro Definition
`(defmacro <name> (arg-1 ... arg-n [& vararg]) <body>)`

Introduces a new macro.

#### Quoting and Unquoting
`(quote <expr-1> ... <expr-n>)` or shortcut `(' <expr-1> ... <expr-n>)`, use 
`'<token>` to quote a single token.

Quotes the given token/expressions, meaning that they will not evaluated but returned
"as is". The symbol `~` can be used to un-quote the expression following it (careful,
`~name` is a single token, thus it will not be un-quoted, use a space for it: `~ name`).

For example:

```
>>> (let (x 2) (' 1 x (inc x) 4))
(1 x (inc x) 4)
>>> (let (x 2) (' 1 ~ x ~(inc x) 4))
(1 2 3 4)
>>> (let (x 2) (' 1 ~ x ~(inc 'x) 4))
Call Stack (most recent last):
  (let (x 2) (' 1 ~ x ~ (...) 4))
  (' 1 ~ x ~ (inc 'x) 4)
  (inc 'x)
  (inc x=x)
Exception happened here: (+ x 1)
...
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +=: 'Token' and 'int'
```

#### Consider as a Variable Name
`($ x)`

Considers `x` as a variable name, and evaluate it, e.g. `(let (x 3) ($ "x"))` evaluates to `3`. A
slightly more complicated example is the pair `(list '+ ($ "x") 4))` and `(list '+ ($ "x") 1))`,
which get evaluated to the same result: `(+ 1 4)` (supposing `x` has value 1).
Useful when writing macros, because it causes `x` to be interpreted as a variable after the macro is
expanded, instead of a string. Consider the `letfn` macro in the standard library:

```
(defmacro letfn (function expression)
    (let (fname (first function)
          fparams (second function)
          fbody (last function)
          anon (map (# list '$ (+ "%" (str %0))) (range (len fparams))))

        (list 'let (list fname (list '# 'let (concat & (zip fparams anon)) fbody))
            expression)))
```

which is supposed to be used like this: `(letfn (add (x y z) (+ x y z)) (add 1 2 3))`,
producing `6` as result; the macro is expanded as
`(let (add (# let (x ($ %0) y ($ %1) z ($ %2)) (+ x y z))) (add 1 2 3))`. The `$` tells
the interpreter that `%0`, `%1` and `%2` should be interpreted as tokens, and hence take
the value of `1`, `2` and `3` respectively; without it, they would be interpreted as strings,
and the result of the expression would be `%0%1%2`.


#### Pattern Matching
`(match <expr> (<pattern-1> <result-1>) ... (<pattern-n> <result-n>))`

Executes the result corresponding to the first pattern that "matches"
`<expr>`, similarly to the unpacking of variables done in `let` expressions.
Raises an error if the variable does not match any pattern.
For example:

```
(match var 
    ((a) "list with one elemet")
    ((a b c) "list with three elements")
    (x "list with a different number of elements or not a list")))
```
